---
documentclass: scrartcl
geometry: "left=1in,right=1in,top=1in,bottom=1in"
papersize: letter
header-includes: |
    \everymath{\displaystyle}
include-before: |
    \texttt{\textbf{\LARGE Ch 4.3 Online Problem}}
    \hfill
    \textit{\huge Chris Achenbach}
    \newenvironment{amatrix}[1]{\left(\begin{array}{@{}*{#1}{c}|c@{}}}{\end{array}\right)}
---

\noindent\rule{\textwidth}{0.4pt}
Solve the Initial Value Problem for
$$y''' - 4y'' + 8y' - 8y = 0$$
given the Initial Values,
$$y(0)=1, \quad y'\!(0)=0, \quad y''\!(0)=0$$
\noindent\rule{\textwidth}{0.4pt}


# Step 1. Classify the Differential Equation

- Third Order
- Linear
- Homogeneous
- Constant Coefficients
- Ordinary Differential Equation

Even though this is a Third Order Equation, we can apply our techniques from Second Order Equations if we can factor it and find the roots.

Since it's a Homogeneous Linear Equation, we already can predict what our general solution will look,
$$
y = c_1y_1 + c_2y_2 + c_3y_3
$$
So our first task will be to discovery the functions of $y_1, y_2, y_3$ and then we will be able to use our initial value conditions to discover the constants $c_1, c_2, c_3$.

# Step 2. Factor and Find Roots

The characteristic of the differential equation is
$$
r^3 - 4r^2 + 8r - 8 = 0
$$
Which we can factor into the form
$$
(r-2)(r^2 - 2r + 4) = 0
$$
The first term $(r-2)$ is a simple real root, so right away we have one of our roots.
$$
r_1 = 2
$$
Now we move our attention to the second term $(r^2 - 2r +4)$ which is called an *irreducible quadratic equation* because it can't be factored into terms with real numbers.  Regardless of what you want to call it, we can still use the Quadratic Equation to find the roots, which gives us,
$${r_2, r_3} = 1 \pm \sqrt{3}i$$
We now have all three roots for the characteristic equation!

# Step 3. Find the General Solution

So looking at our three roots for the characteristic, we have
$$
r_1 = 2
\quad \text{and} \quad
r_2, r_3 = 1 \pm \sqrt{3}i
$$
and our goal to is figure out what the $y_1, y_2, y_3$ terms are in the general solution for this equation,
$$
y = c_1y_1 + c_2y_2 + c_3y_3
$$
Looking back at the previous chapters, we can make use of our tricks for simple roots, which gives us
$$
    y_1 = e^{r_1t} = e^{2t}
$$
and then we can make use of our tricks for complex conjugates to give us the remaining two solutions $y_2, y_3$, making use of the complex roots $r_2, r_3$ that we found.
$$
\begin{aligned}
    y_2
    &= e^{\alpha t} \sin{\!(\beta t)}
    = e^{t} \sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
    \\
    y_3
    &= e^{\alpha t} \cos{\!(\beta t)}
    = e^{t} \cos{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
\end{aligned}
$$
Now we have all of the pieces of the solution! Woot! Putting them all together, we have found the general solution to the homogeneous equation!
$$
\boxed{
y =
c_1 e^{2t} +
c_2 e^{t} \sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)} +
c_3 e^{t} \cos{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
}
$$

# Step 4. Solve the Initial Value Problem

We have a general solution to the homogeneous equation, and we want to figure out what those constants $c_1, c_2, c_3$ are.  Since there are three constants, we need three initial values.  We will create a *System of Linear Equations* with three equations and three unknowns, and solve that to find the what the constants.

We have the initial values,
$$
y(0)=1, \quad y'\!(0)=0, \quad y''\!(0)=0
$$
and we can find the derivatives of our general solution,
$$
\begin{aligned}
y &= \quad
    c_1 e^{2t} \\
&\qquad +
    c_2 e^{t} \sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)} \\
&\qquad +
    c_3 e^{t} \cos{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
\\
\\
y' &= \quad 2 c_1 e^{2t} \\
&\qquad
+
    \big(c_2 - \sqrt{3}c_3 \big)
    \cdot e^{t} \sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)} \\
&\qquad
+
    \big(\sqrt{3}c_2 + c_3 \big)
    \cdot e^{t} \cos{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
\\
\\
y'' &= \quad 4 c_1 e^{2t} \\
&\qquad
+
    \big( -2c_2 - 2\sqrt{3}c_3 \big)
    \cdot e^{t} \sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)} \\
&\qquad
+
    \big( 2\sqrt{3}c_2 - 2c_3 \big)
    \cdot e^{t} \cos{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
\end{aligned}
$$

This is where the initial values being set at $t=0$ becomes extremely useful. Most of the terms get canceled out to either 1 or 0, and we are left with super simple linear equations that still have the unknown constants left in them.
$$
\begin{aligned}
y(0) &= c_1 + c_3 &= 1\\
y'\!(0) &= 2c_1 + \sqrt{3}c_2 + c_3 &= 0 \\
y''\!(0) &= 4c_1 + 2\sqrt{3}c_2 - 2c_3 &= 0
\end{aligned}
$$
Which, we could put into an *Augmented Matrix* and use our awesome linear algebra skillz to solve!
$$
\begin{amatrix}{3}
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\
2 & \sqrt{3} & 1 & 0 \\
4 & 2\sqrt{3} & -2 & 0
\end{amatrix}
$$
And after you solve for this, you end up with the constants,
$$
\begin{aligned}
c_1 &= 1 \\
c_2 &= \tfrac{-2}{\sqrt{3}} \\
c_3 &= 0
\end{aligned}
$$
which we plug into our original general solution, finally giving us the answer to the initial value problem!
$$
\boxed{\boxed{\boxed{
\boxed{
\boxed{
y = e^{2t} - \tfrac{2}{\sqrt{3}}e^t\sin{\!(\sqrt{3}t)}
}
}
}}}
$$
